Traditore: Those who recanted Christianity during times of persecution.
Novatian Cyprian: Novation was a confessor during persecution, he wanted the church to be led by confessors. Cyprian was against this idea. Novation and his followers eventually left the church and started their own denomination.
Perpetua: Early Christian who was martyred during the early 3rd century. She experienced visions. 
Incarnation: In Flesh, doctrine that God took on flesh through Jesus.
Tradition: Standard way of life and teachings of the church.
Docetism: One of the five points of Gnosticism. Christ wasn’t a real person. He was a spiritual person who either took over the body of some guy named Jesus, or that Christ appeared as a person.
Apostolic Succession: Direct line from the leader of a church to Jesus. Bishops were a direct connection to Jesus. 
Logos: A mediator between the creator (God) and creation.
Social History:  
Dualism: One of the five points of Gnosticism. Belief that matter is evil and that spirit is good. Matter is a product of the demiurge, and thus bad.
Pax Romana: Roman Peace. Empire owes its safety to Caesar.
Decius: Empire from 250-251. Empire wide persecution of Christians, a lot of deaths during this time.
Bishop: Tasked with keeping the tradition of the church. Leaders of a group of churches. Seen as a direct connection to Jesus.
Deacon: Leader of a single church.
Ecclesiology: Talking about the church, and talking about what the church is. 
Irenaeus: Church leader who wrote about salvation. He believed that salvation is about becoming a new human.
Recapitulation: To put a new head on something. Jesus was the new head of the world. 
Anthropology:  
Tripartite: The body is split into three distinct parts; body, soul, and spirit.
Pliny: Roman governor under emperor Trajan. Persecuted Christians.
Apostolic Teaching: The teachings of the apostles were the most sacred traditions of the church. 
Donatism: Group that spilt from main-stream Christianity after the conversion of Constantine and the church’s allying with the empire. 
Penance: Christians atoning for their sins. Particularly those who had recanted Christianity during times of persecution who wanted back into the church.
Confessors: Those who continued to confess to being Christian during times of persecution and were eventually let go.
Augustine: Philosopher in the early church. (4th & 5th century). Main issues concerned visible vs. invisible church, sacraments & lapsed priests, and general vs particular election.
Roman Pantheon: The “collection” of roman gods/deities. 
Platonism: One of the main branches of Greek philosophy, had some philosophical overlaps with Christianity such as the idea of a creator, and monotheism.
Stoicism: Another branch of Greek philosophy, mains ideas were patterning your life off of the divine order of nature. Both Stoicism and Platonism believed in the logos and the belief in an infinite god.
Heresy: Sects/branches of Christianity that went against the church’s tradition. An example of this would be Gnosticism.
Orthodoxy: The act of following the “correct” tradition of the church. 

